Fabulously Festive Holiday Cookie Recipes — plus how to freeze and ship them right!


Let’s be honest. This is why it’s the most wonderful time of the year.

Is there a time of year where the phrase “I made cookies!” is greeted with more excitement? It’s hard to tell who is more excited, the lucky recipient or the baker. Holiday baking means layered treats, sugar-dusted biscuits, not to mention icing, sprinkles and cutouts galore. Serious bakers have been looking forward to this time of year since, oh, Labour Day. And whether you’re one of them or a novice, we’ve got exactly what you need to make your cookie baking a success from start to finish. We’ve rounded up some of our favourite holiday cookie recipes plus the three tips you’ll need specifically for these festive batches. From working ahead to shipping cross-country, here’s how to make holiday cookies like Santa’s star elf.


Start baking now!

Most cookies freeze well (note: some do not, like cookies with delicate structures, fine decorations or temperamental fillings) which is a great reason to get a head start. A better reason to start early is that this way, if you burn a batch or forget an ingredient, you have lots of time for do-overs. The best reason is time to make extra batches for yourself after you get your potluck and gifting baking done. And as the mid-December holiday crunch comes, you’ll be so happy you baked early in the month.

But, you want to bake and freeze correctly to preserve your masterpieces.

The easiest way to do this is to bake off the cookies, let them cool, then freeze them in a single layer on a baking sheet before popping them into an airtight freezer container or resealable bag. Alternatively, you can layer cookies between pieces of parchment to freeze them on the baking sheet before and sealing them up. By preventing them from freezing together, you not only preserve the integrity of your creations, you can easily grab just a handful for any occasion and extend your supply by only thawing what you need.

To recreate that freshly-baked quality, pop frozen cookies into a 275F degrees oven and gently reheat for 10-15 minutes.


Have holiday cookies, will travel — here’s how:

A box of your homemade cookies is the perfect gift for someone who can’t make it home this year. With the right recipes and packaging, they’ll easily survive a trip. Choose naturally-dry cookies like biscotti, or something with an extra-high sugar and fat content like shortbread. Both of these kinds of cookies will still taste as they should a week later.

Pack your cookies tightly for travel. Seal them in a plastic bag, sucking the air out of it with a straw. Put that bag in an airtight container with hard sides, and one that fits the cookies snugly, so when the box moves, the cookies don’t. Think ahead and save packaging from online orders throughout the year so you can shove bubble packaging between your mailing box and the container as a buffer.


Gluten-free holiday cookies are a thing. A delicious thing!

Gluten-free holiday cookies are easier than you think, and are always handy to have on hand in case you’re hosting someone with gluten intolerance or sensitivity. Recipes for macarons and meringues are usually naturally gluten-free, so bake them off for your cookie platter, or let them stand on their own. Bonus: both can be made ahead too.

If you’re baking for someone with celiac disease, you’ll want to be especially careful to avoid cross-contamination, for instance, never use a spoon that was dipped into flour into your sugar bowl. And because cross-contamination can also occur in the factory, make sure all of your ingredients, even baking powder, are labeled ‘gluten-free’ to ensure they’re safe.

Most everyone, whether gluten-sensitive or intolerant, or not, will really appreciate a batch of these Chickpea Chocolate Mint Chip Cookies, trust us!

With tips for baking ahead, sending cookies by mail successfully, and gluten-free baking, let’s get to the recipes. Following are some of our favourite cookie recipes. Perfect for the holidays and perfect to get started on right now!





Chocolate Chip Cookies

Say goodbye to chocolate chip cookies that turn out like hockey pucks

This recipe is chewy and crispy with tons of flavour. Great for an ice cream sandwich, dunking in milk or just on their own!


Ingredients

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, room temperature
¾ cup granulated sugar
¾ cup dark brown sugar
1 tsp corn syrup
2 eggs, room temperature
1 tsp vanilla extract
2 cups all-purpose flour
2 tsp Kosher salt
¾ tsp baking soda
1 8oz semisweet chocolate bar, hand chopped
Coarse sea salt


Preparation

In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, salt and baking powder, set aside.

In the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, cream the butter and sugars together until doubled in volume and lighter in colour, 8-10 minutes. Add the eggs one at a time, mixing the first one in entirely before adding the second. Add the corn syrup and vanilla, mix until incorporated.

Mix in the prepared flour mixture and chopped chocolate, mix until incorporated. Using a 1oz scoop, scoop cookie dough onto a parchment lined baking sheet, cover with plastic wrap and chill overnight.

When ready to bake, Preheat oven to 325f. Prepare 3 rimmed cookie sheets with parchment paper. Place cookies on baking sheet at least 3” apart and sprinkle tops with a small amount of coarse sea salt. Transfer cookie sheets to oven and bake until golden brown around the edges, 12-15 minutes, rotating pans halfway through baking.

Cool for 5 minutes of baking sheet and then transfer to wire rack to cool entirely. Store in an airtight container at room temperature for up to 3 days, or as long as they last!





Ginger Sparkle Cookies

There’s nothing like the aroma of ginger cookies baking. Well, except, eating them when they are warm and fresh out of the oven.


Ingredients

2 cups + 2 tbsp all-purpose flour
2 tsp baking soda
2 tsp ground ginger
1 tsp ground cinnamon
½ tsp ground allspice
½ tsp salt
¼ tsp each ground cloves and nutmeg
Pinch cayenne pepper
¾ cup unsalted butter, at room temperature
1 cup packed brown sugar
1 egg
¼ cup molasses
1 tsp vanilla extract
Coarse decorating or granulated sugar, for rolling


Preparation

Whisk together flour, baking soda, ginger, cinnamon, allspice, salt, cloves, nutmeg and cayenne pepper; set aside.

Beat butter and brown sugar with electric beaters until light and fluffy, scraping down sides of bowl as needed. Beat in egg until combined. Stir in molasses and vanilla until blended. Stir in dry ingredients; beat just until blended. Cover and let stand in refrigerator for at least 1 hour and up to 2 days. (This will make them easy to roll and shape.)

Preheat oven to 375f. Using a tablespoon to measure, roll dough into roughly 1-inch balls. Roll the balls in sugar to coat and place on parchment paper-lined baking sheets, spacing about 2-inches apart. Press dough with tines of fork in a crisscross pattern to flatten slightly. Top with a pinch more sugar. (If the dough is too soft to work with, pop in freezer for a few minutes to firm up.)

Bake in middle of the oven, one tray at a time, until the cookies are set around the edges but still a little soft in the centre, about 9 to 11 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. Store in an airtight container for up to 3 days, or freeze for up to 1 month.


Recipe notes:

For fully-loaded ginger cookies, add chopped pecans, white chocolate chunks and chopped crystallized ginger to the dough.

Coarse sugar for cookies, also called decorative or sanding sugar can be found at bulk food stores. It really does make the ginger cookies sparkle but granulated sugar is just as pretty and delicious.

Servings: Makes about 30 cookies





Milk Chocolate Digestive Cookies

Tempering chocolate can be challenging for bakers, but if you follow this recipe, it’ll be a snap.


Ingredients

1 cup whole wheat flour
⅓ cup all-purpose flour
⅓ cup wheat bran
¼ cup packed light brown sugar
½ tsp salt
⅔ cup cold unsalted butter, cubed
1 - 2 tbsp milk
3 cups chopped milk chocolate


Preparation

Preheat oven to 350f. Line two rimmed baking sheets with parchment paper. Set aside.

In a food processor, pulse together flours, wheat bran, sugar and salt. Add butter and pulse until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Gradually add milk until dough is moistened and holds together when squeezed.
Turn dough out onto counter and knead gently to bring together.

How to make a perfect chocolate cookie:
Flour counter and roll dough to scant ¼-inch thick. Cut into rounds and place on prepared baking sheets.
Bake 16 - 18 minutes, until firm and edges begin to brown. Cool for two minutes on pan, then remove to a wire cooling rack to cool completely.

While cookies are baking, melt ¾ of the chocolate in a large heat-proof bowl set over a saucepan of simmering water. Melt chocolate to 45C. Remove from heat and add reserved chocolate. Continue stirring until temperature reaches 27c. Briefly place bowl over simmering water and heat chocolate gently to 29 - 30c.

Dip one face of each cookie into tempered chocolate, then make a criss-cross pattern in the chocolate with the tines of a fork. Place — chocolate side up — on cooling racks to dry.

Preparation Time: 55 Minutes

Servings: Makes 18 cookies





Spiced Chocolate Crinkle Cookies

The secret to these easy holiday cookies is using melted chocolate and oil instead of butter. The oil and chocolate allow the crinkle to form while baking. Play around with the spices and create an original combination!


Ingredients

½ cup vegetable oil
4oz unsweetened chocolate, melted and cooled
2 cups granulated sugar
1 tsp pure vanilla extract
4 eggs
2 cups all-purpose flour
2 tsp baking powder
1 tsp kosher salt
1 tsp ground cinnamon
½ tsp ground cayenne pepper
1 cup icing sugar


Preparation

In a medium bowl, sift together flour, baking powder, salt and spices and set aside. In a large bowl, combine vegetable oil, melted chocolate, sugar and vanilla with a wooden spoon.

Beat in eggs, one at a time. Fold in the flour mixture, cover with plastic wrap and chill for at least 2 hours.

Preheat oven to 350f. Line cookie sheets with parchment paper. Sift icing sugar into a wide shallow bowl. Drop chilled dough by tablespoons into icing sugar and roll to form into a ball. Place cookies about 2” apart on cookie sheet.

Bake cookie 8-10 minutes, until just set. Take care not to overbake. Remove cookies to cooling rack immediately.
